## Abstract

COVID-19 associated VTE is a new disease entity with high morbidity and
mortality. The aim of this paper is to review contemporary emerging literature
on the incidence, pathophysiology, predictive prognostic indicators, and
management consensus for Covid-19 related thrombotic complications, in
particular DVT and PE.

A literature review was performed according to the Preferred Reporting Items
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement. All searches were
done via PubMed. References of review articles were further screened according
to the exclusion criteria.

In total, 154 records were identified and 20 duplicates were removed. A final
68 articles were included in the qualitative analysis. COVID-19 related
thrombosis can affect multiple organs of the body, presenting in the form of
arterial or venous thrombosis such as ischemic stroke, myocardial infarction,
mesenteric ischemia, limb ischemia, DVT, or PE. DVT and PE has an overall
incidence of 6-26%, and severely ill COVID-19 patients have even higher
incidence of thromboembolism. On the other hand, incidence of arterial
thromboembolism is much lower with incidence of 0.7%-3.7%. D-dimer is found to
be an independent risk factor, and IMPROVE score, Caprini score, and Padua
score have all been used as predictors. International guidelines suggest the
use of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) or fondaparinux for prophylaxis of
VTE, and therapeutic dosage of weight adjusted LMWH for treatment if confirmed
diagnosis.

Contemporary rapidly evolving evidence shows that COVID-19 associated
thrombosis was a novel clinical entity, especially in severely ill COVID-19
patients. There are multiple society-driven guidelines only, but without any
level 1 evidence for management regimen. The ideal dose for prophylaxis is not
established and may vary depending on balance of bleeding and thrombosis risk.
The risk of bleeding may be increased in patients in intensive care unit.

## Introduction

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is responsible for the recent global
pandemic, with cumulative number of cases reported globally exceeding 180
million and the number of global deaths of almost four million on 29 June
2021, and numbers are escalating. This new respiratory infectious disease was
first identified in Wuhan, Hubei Provence in China in December 2019.1
Pulmonary manifestations of COVID-19 are common and can present with dry
cough, rhinorrhea, shortness of breath, and fever.2-4 The high infectivity of
this disease and rapid deterioration observed in patients of all ages has
raised global concerns on disease control and led to extensive research on
tackling this unknown virus.

Apart from pulmonary manifestations, the incidence of COVID-19 associated
thrombosis is high, affecting both the arterial and venous systems of the
body. The incidence of thrombotic complications is particularly prevalent in
patients who are severely ill, especially in those who were admitted to
intensive care units (ICU). Pulmonary embolism (PE) contributes to the
majority of venous thromboembolism (VTE), followed by deep vein thrombosis
(DVT).5 Higher risk of all-cause mortality is found in those who developed
thrombotic complications.6 The pathophysiology behind the prevalence of
COVID-19 thrombosis is not entirely clear. Some authors postulate that it
triggers a similar coagulation cascade as the severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS) virus, while others believe that SARS-CoV-2 has its own unique
target receptors.

The aim of this paper is to review contemporary emerging literature on the
incidence, pathophysiology, predictive prognostic indicators, and management
consensus for COVID-19 related thrombotic complications, in particular DVT and
PE.

## Methods

We reviewed the literature on COVID-19 related thrombosis via PUBMED according
to PRISMA criteria.7 The search was limited to articles published between
first of December in 2019 and 30th of June in 2021, while excluding non-
English and non-human trials. The following "free text" keywords for PUBMED
were used: "covid," "covid-19," "coronavirus," "SARS-CoV-2," "thrombosis,"
"predictors," "predictor," "predictive," "prognostic," "prognostic indicator,"
"biomarker," and "biomarkers." Manual search using the bibliography from
identified articles was performed.

All observational studies or reports on COVID-19 were screened. Exclusion
criteria included publications without full text, abstracts only, case reports
with less than 5 cases, observational studies with less than 5 cases and non-
English publications. All studies which met the selection criteria were
reviewed independently by two authors (NM and YC). Discrepancies between the
two reviewers were resolved by discussion and consensus. The data extracted
include: incidence of thrombosis amongst patients with COVID-19,
pathophysiology of the disease, predictive prognostic indicators in regards to
morbidity and mortality, and suggested treatment consensus. The data was
extracted manually and electronically tabulated into Microsoft Excel spread
sheet for further analysis.

Initial search on PUBMED yielded 154 studies. After removing 20 duplicates,
134 abstracts were screened. Another 15 studies were excluded as they either
had no full text available or were not available in English. Finally, 119 full
texts were screened and 51 studies were excluded for being outside the topic
of interest. Bibliography from the selected studies were screened to look for
other suitable studies. In the end, 68 studies were selected, including four
meta-analysis, 15 systematic reviews, 24 topic reviews, 20 observational
studies in the form of either case series, case control or cohort studies, and
5 case reports. The PRISMA diagram is shown in Figure 1.

## Incidence

COVID-19 related thrombosis can affect multiple organs of the body, presenting
in the form of arterial or venous thrombosis such as ischemic stroke,
myocardial infarction, mesenteric ischemia, limb ischemia, DVT, or PE.19 DVT
and PE are the most frequently reported diagnoses amongst all thrombotic
complications. A systematic review and meta-analysis by _Porfidia_ et al. 9
reported the incidence of VTE amongst patients with COVID-19 to be 6-26%,
including 12% of patient diagnosed with PE with or without DVT and 14% of
patients with DVT alone. In a single center retrospective study from Milan14
that included 388 patients who were diagnosed with COVID-19 within a 2-month
period, it was suggested that despite the use of routine thrombo-prophylaxis
with low molecular weight heparin, the incidence of venous thromboembolism was
still up to 20%. A retrospective study conducted amongst COVID-19 patients
admitted into intensive care units (ICU) showed that severely ill patients had
even higher incidence of thromboembolism up to 69%.20 While another single
center study reported 20-26.6% of patients admitted into ICU presented with
pulmonary embolism.21 In a case series conducted in France, amongst COVID-19
patients in ICU within a 1-month period, the incidence of PE was 20.6% versus
7.5% compared to patients who were admitted to ICU in the same hospital due to
influenza in 2019.22

Moreover, matched cohorts between COVID-19 patients who developed acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) with non-COVID-19 patients with ARDS
revealed markedly higher incidence of 11.7% versus 2.7%, respectively, with
odds ratio of 6.2.10 Those who developed thrombotic complications are found to
have a higher risk of all-cause mortality with a hazard ratio of 5.4 (95% CI
2.4-12).16

On the other hand, the incidence of arterial thromboembolism is much lower
than venous thromboembolism, ranging from 0.7% to 3.7%, in the form of
ischemic stroke, acute coronary syndrome, limb ischemia, and mesenteric
ischemia.10,11,14 A single centered retrospective study from Madrid including
1419 patients with COVID-19 reported incidence of systemic arterial events to
be 1%, including three patients who developed infrapopliteal arterial
occlusion which were treated conservatively.23 Incidence of acute limb
ischemia in COVID-19 patients was shown to be higher than that in non-COVID-19
patients at 16.3% versus 1.8% from a comparative cohort study.12 A point to
note when interpreting this study is that this study compared the incidence of
acute limb ischemia over a 3-month period (January to March in 2020 vs 2019,
respectively), and that three out of the 23 patients did not have COVID-19 in
the 2020 group.

## Pathophysiology

SARS-CoV-2 predominantly enters cells via angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
two inhibitors that are abundant in the lung and in the endothelium of blood
vessels.24,25 This may cause a profound cytokine reaction, triggering an
overexpression of tissue factors, localized intravascular coagulopathy, and
dysregulation of the coagulation cascade, tipping more toward the thrombotic
end.24,26-28This triggers an increase in coagulation factors, including Factor
VIII and Von Willebrand factor (VWF).10 Elevated VWF and reduced ADAMTS-13
indicate the promotion of microthrombi formation along with endothelial injury
and coagulopathy.15 Continuous viral shedding encourages viremia, leading to a
systemic inflammatory response and platelet activation. Severe inflammation
may be reflected as lymphopenia and thrombocytopenia; while liver injury may
be associated with decreased coagulation and antithrombin formation.29,30
Comparing with the SARS virus, SARS-CoV-2 has 10 to 20 times higher affinity
to ACE2 receptors.31 This uncontrolled trigger of the clotting cascade
promotes thrombosis especially in the lung. As ACE2 receptors are also found
in arterial endothelial cells, large amount of released interleukin-6 (IL-6)
encourages inflammatory infiltrates to deposit throughout arterial walls
causing endothelial activation and dysfunction.27 This is supported by recent
autopsy studies on the histopathology of resected arterial segments in
deceased COVID-19 patients which found abnormally large amount of inflammatory
infiltrates and endothelial proliferation throughout the arterial walls.

IL-6 and IL-17 were found to be positively correlated with COVID-19 disease
progression and the former was found to be significantly raised in those who
were critically ill, up to more than 10 times higher than normal population or
patients with mild COVID-19 infection. This results in higher deposition of
fibrin, damaging the parenchyma of the lungs.32 Moreover, IL-17 aggravates
inflammatory levels and induce airway mucosal layers to produce chemokine
ligand, granylocyte, and macrophage colony stimulating factors, causing
granulocytes to infiltrate the lung.33,34 In addition, the binding of the
virus to the pneumocytes will trigger a local immune response and cause a
cytokine storm in the lung. This in turn may promote local thrombus formation
in the pulmonary vessels, which is a different mechanism of pulmonary
thrombosis distinct from emboli from the systemic venous circulation. This
theory is supported by several autopsy findings. First, many patients with
COVID-19 who developed PE do not have evidence of DVT.31 Second, autopsy
studies also found thrombosis occurring within the pulmonary arterial
circulation in the absence of apparent venous embolism.35,36 The proposed
theory of an imbalance in proinflammatory status leading to increased
inflammatory cells in vessels of the lung created doubts on treating these
patient with standard medications for PE, such as prophylactic or therapeutic
doses of anticoagulation as a usual practice. This was further supported by
the fact that despite routine thrombo-prophylaxis amongst patients from
Western countries, retrospective studies did not show a lower incidence in
COVID-19 patients with VTE complications. Therefore, some clinicians suggest
the usage of anti-inflammatory medications such as anti-cytokine drugs or
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) to hasten the proinflammatory
response instead of relying on anticoagulation alone.37

## Predictive prognostic indicators and scoring systems

D-dimer is a known marker of fibrin formation and pathological activation of
the hemostatic pathway.38 Multiple observational studies have suggested that
D-dimer is associated with worse morbidities and mortalities in COVID-19
patients.39,40 It is also an independent risk factor for more ICU admissions,
PE, ARDS, as well as mortality.41,42 Some authors suggested interpretation of
local D-dimer assays with one cut-off for risk assessment. _Zhou_ et al.39
proposed D-dimer >1 μg/mL was indicative of higher odds of death.43 _Yao_ et
al.40 reported a D-dimer level of 6.21mg/L versus 1.02 mg/L between non-
survivors and survivors of COVID-19, respectively.44 _Cui_ et al.41 suggested
that D-dimer cut-off value of 1.51μg/mL had a sensitivity of 85% and
specificity of 88.5% for predicting the incidence of VTE.8 On the other hand,
some authors advocated the use of continuous levels of D-dimer to assess the
severity of disease and predict the need for mechanical ventilation and other
adverse outcomes.45,46 A recently published meta-analysis suggests that only
D-dimer and age are predictive of thrombotic events in COVID-19 patients.47
While another meta-analysis of 13 studies suggest at age >65 years, male
gender, arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, and
respiratory disease are significant risk factors for severe COVID-19 and
death.26 Major studies in which use of the D-dimer assay has been explored as
a prognostic indicator are summarized in Table 2.

More recently, a lymphocyte percentage-time model has been proposed to
correlate the change of lymphocyte level with survival. Moderate disease can
be predicted in patients who have lymphocyte percentage >20% within 10-20 days
after onset of symptoms, whilst those with 5%-20% would have more severe
symptoms. Those with <5% lymphocyte percentage would have a high risk of
mortality.48

There are various risk assessment models for venous thromboembolism,
originally designated outside the context of COVID-19 associated thrombosis.
International medical prevention registry on VTE (IMPROVE) score and Caprini
score have been used to assess VTE risks in patients with active cancer and in
surgical patients, respectively. It is suggested that these scoring systems
could be applied in patients with COVID-19 as well. The former assessed seven
risk factors including, active cancer, previous episode of VTE, thrombophilia,
paralysis of the lower limbs, immobilization less than 7 days, admission to
ICU or coronary care unit and age greater than 60 years old; presence of more
than one risk factor increases the risk of symptomatic VTE to 7.2%.30,49
Previous external validation has confirmed that IMPROVE score has good
discrimination and calibration in identifying medical patients at risk of VTE,
with area under receiving operating characteristic curve of 0.702.50 However,
this study was not specific to COVID-19 patients. On the other hand, the
Caprini score was originally developed for surgical patients to derive their
VTE risks, stratifying them into "high risk group" (≥5 points), "moderate risk
group" (3-4 points) and "low risk group" (2 points), respectively. This score
takes into consideration factors such as age, sex, type of surgery performed,
pre-existing venous disease, pre-existing medical diseases and recent
comorbidities with known risks of further thrombosis.51 Each of these factors
carry one score and the total score would put patients into the above-
mentioned risk groups accordingly. This scoring system is practical and user-
friendly as it is categorical and involves simple calculation.52 A
retrospective study from Russia has found strong positive correlation between
Caprini score of 168 patients with the incidence of symptomatic VTE and
unfavorable outcomes including admission to ICU, requirement of invasive
mechanical ventilation, and death. Padua prediction score (PPS)53 is a risk
assessment model (RAM) created by modifying the initial Kucher's model, which
is used to calculate the risks of VTE in hospitalized medical patients without
medical prophylaxis.54 Risk factors such as active cancer, previous VTE,
bedrest ≥3 days, and thrombophillia carry three points each; recent trauma or
surgery (≤1 month) carries two points; age ≥70, heart or respiratory failure,
acute myocardial infarction or ischemia stroke, active infection or
rheumatological disorder, obesity with body mass index ≥30 kg/m2 and ongoing
hormonal treatment carry one point each. Patients with PPS ≥4 is considered to
have a high risk of developing VTE and should be prescribed with
thrombopropohylaxis. PPS has also been found to be an independent risk factor
for in-hospital mortality of COVID-19 patients. (OR 7.35, 95% confidence
interval 3.08-16.01) Moreover, prophylactic anticoagulation in higher PPS
patients showed mild advantage in mortality without statistical significance
(37.1% versus 45,7%, _p_ = .42).55

The COMPASS-COVID-19 score is validated to be used as a tool to evaluate the
risk of worsening disease. It includes scoring according to the presence of
obesity with BMI > 30, male gender, compensated DIC-ISTH score ≥5,
thrombocytopenia (platelet count <100,000/μL), prothrombin time prolongation
(>control +3 seconds), raised D-dimer, antithrombin decrease, protein C
decrease, lymphocytes <109/L, and hemoglobin <11 g/dL. Each of these factors
have different score bearing according to its presence and serum level if
applicable.56

## C reactive protein

C-reactive protein (CRP) is known to be a biochemical marker of inflammation
produced by the liver in response to mediators of inflammation.57 A systematic
review on COVID-19 patients concluded that CRP is not only higher in patients
who are critically ill, correlates with disease progression, and it is also
higher in refractory patients compared to general patients.58-60 It is also
shown to be one of the earliest markers to start rising in severe patients,
compared to erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and computer tomography (CT)
scores.61 Therefore, CRP correlated with disease progression and predicts
severe COVID-19 at an early stage.59 Some studies even suggested the usage of
CRP in conjunction with other biomarkers to predict COVID-19 severity.
Increased CRP is common for thrombotic events, but it may not be a specific
predictor for the severity of COVID-19 associated thrombosis.

## New serological biomarkers

A study from China suggested that some novel serological biomarkers may be
related to the clinical progression of COVID-9 disease. This retrospective
study looks into the relationship between blood levels of neutrophil-
lymphocyte ratio (NLR), platelet-lymphocyte ratio (PLR), lymphocyte-monocyte
ratio (LMR), derived neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio (dNLR), high sensitivity
C-reactive protein-albumin ratio (HsCAR), albumin-to-fibrinogen ratio (AFR),
prognostic nutritional index (PNI), systemic immune-inflammation index (SII),
and high sensitivity C-reactive protein-prealbumin ratio (HsCPAR). Results
showed that levels of NLR, PLR, HsCAR, dNLR, SII, and HxCPAR were
significantly elevated in those with severe disease ( _p_ < .0001) compared to
patients with mild to moderate disease, as well as with lower LMR, PNI, and
AFR levels. These markers were incorporated to become a prognostic nomogram
with concordance index (C-index) of 0.873 (95% CI: 0.808-0.938). These markers
are however not routinely taken in usual hospital settings in the rest of the
world and its cost effectiveness needs to be further elucidated.62

Presepsin (PSP) is an existing biomarker for early diagnosis, risk
stratification, and prognostic prediction of pneumonia.63,64 Due to the host-
pathogen interaction, PSP exhibits a dose-response mechanism, aiding early
recognition of patients with a predicted severe disease course for subsequent
treatment.65,66 Higher serum concentrations of PSP was found to correlate with
poorer outcomes and longer ICU stay. Furthermore, PSP was found to correlate
well with procalcitonin (r = 0.72, _p_ < .001) but not with CRP (r = 0.59, _p_
< .001).67

## Prophylaxis

The World Health Organization (WHO) published an interim guidance statement in
January 2020 in the early phase of the discovery of COVID-19, suggesting that
all patients with COVID-19 are considered to be at high risk of VTE.68
Prophylactic anticoagulation should be administered to all patients admitted
to hospitals in the form of either of the following: enoxaparin 40 mg
subcutaneously (SC) daily, unfractionated heparin (UFH) 5000 IU SC twice daily
or fondaparinux 2.5 mg daily SC, which should all be titrated against body
mass index (BMI).68 LMWH and fondaparinux were favored over UFH to limit
medical staff exposure and direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) were found to
interact with some of the antiviral regimens for COVID-19. Therefore, LMWH and
fondaparinux are recommended as first line treatment for prophylaxis in
acutely ill patients.69 Extended prophylaxis with either low molecular weight
heparin (LMWH) or direct oral anticoagulation (DOAC) is also suggested up to
45 days after discharge, while balancing the risks of bleeding.

Chinese guideline recommendations are against the universal routine
pharmacological thrombo-prophylaxis for all COVID-19 patients.70-72 The
recommendation is to adopt the usage of Padua score, IMPROVE score, or Caprini
score to stratify patients who present with mild or moderate symptoms into
high or low risk of developing VTE and adopt an individualized plan for every
patient.70 Pharmacological or mechanical thrombo-prophylaxis is only
recommended for those who developed severe COVID-19 disease, with the use of
LMWH as first line or unfractionated heparin in patients with renal
impairment.

American Multi-society guidelines recommend increased mobility for patients
who are diagnosed with COVID-19 but without the need for hospitalization.30
Indiscriminate use of pharmacological thrombo-prophylaxis is not recommended
in the outpatient setting, but risk stratification should be used to select
high risk VTE patients with low risk of bleeding to consider such therapy.30

The Hospital Medicine Reengineering Network (HOMERuN) has conducted a study on
reviewing existing local protocols on COVID-19 associated VTE at 21 academic
medical centers in the United States.73 The suggestions that were made based
on the percentage of consensus agreement amongst the submitted local
protocols. There is 100% consensus agreement for the need of universal VTE
prophylaxis for COVID-19 in-patients without contraindications, coherent with
suggestions from CHEST guideline and Expert Panel Report.69 Those
contraindicated to anticoagulation may be given mechanical prophylaxis
instead. However, the dosage of suggested anticoagulation varied. Most authors
suggested adopting usual therapeutic weight adjusted dosing for all patients
while some suggested considering intensified dosage in patients with higher
risk of developing VTE. These include patients with raised D-dimer, fibrinogen
or simply clinically determined as having a higher risk, for example, in those
who are critically ill, required mechanical ventilation, deteriorating,
pregnant, with malignancy, or had history of coagulation problems before.73
However, receiving a higher dosage of anticoagulation may incur higher or even
life threatening risks of bleeding in certain groups of patients. A
retrospective study looking into COVID-19 patients admitted into ICU within a
1.5 months period revealed a 21% significant hemorrhage event after
anticoagulation.74 Amongst these patients, 84% received a full dosage of
anticoagulation including 50% of them not having a confirmed diagnosis of
thrombosis beforehand. Results from this study raise concerns on the
importance of establishing a definite diagnosis before starting therapeutic
treatment, as bleeding complications may be severe, with 14% fatality and 64%
requiring red blood cell transfusion. Giving full dosage of anticoagulation to
all patients may result in more harm than good, and potential benefits of
systemic anticoagulation need to be weighed against the risk of bleeding and
therefore should be individualized. It is noted that bleeding complications
are more common among intubated COVID-19 patients compared to non-intubated
patients.27

A large scale study involving more than 2770 patients hospitalized with
COVID-19 in New York concluded that anticoagulation was shown to reduce
mortality in patients who were mechanically ventilated (29.1% versus 62.7%).75
Longer duration of anticoagulation given is also associated with reduced
mortality (HR 0.86 per day, 95% CI 0.82-0.89, _p_ < .001). Overall, there is
no difference detected in this cohort regarding in-hospital mortality amongst
patients with and without anticoagulation.

## Diagnosis

Amongst the Chinese guidelines, radiological imaging is necessary only if
there is clinical suspicion of VTE.71,72 Viscoelastic tests such as
thromboelastography (TEG) or coagulation and platelet function analyzers may
serve to aid diagnosis if local resources are available.72 Routine screening
for VTE for hospitalized patients with elevated D-dimer but without relevant
symptoms is not recommended.30 This is in concordance with the suggestions
from the National Institute of Health (NIH) guidelines for COVID-19. There is
insufficient data to recommend for or against the usage of routine hematologic
and coagulation parameters to guide all management decisions.76 Routine
screening of VTE is difficult and not practical, with concerns regarding risk
of transmitting infection during diagnostic procedures, as well as in
situations when patients are in critical condition such as ARDS. Amongst
HOMERuN guidelines, there is no consensus on whether diagnostic radiological
tests should be enforced routinely as screening or arranged according to
clinical suspicion. Some clinicians suggest the usage of bedside tests over
conventional CT or ultrasound at radiology department to minimize risks of
infection spreading.73

## Treatment

According to the WHO guidelines, in the setting of confirmed VTE, increased
dosage of anticoagulation as compared to standard therapeutic regimen is not
recommended.68 For confirmed VTE, HOMERuN guidelines suggested therapeutic
doses of LMWH or UFH as of other major guidelines, for a total duration of 3
months.69,73 Some recommended prescribing therapeutic doses to patients who
had high index of suspicion despite being unable to undergo diagnostic tests
for confirmation.73 71% of protocols recommended monitoring complete blood
count, prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, D-dimer, and
fibrinogen, in corporation with the presence of any bleeding symptoms to guide
treatment and determine whether transfusion or anticoagulation is needed.

CHEST guidelines and expert panel report suggested giving therapeutic weight
adjusted LMWH or UFH for diagnosed proximal DVT or PE.69 For those treated as
outpatient setting for similar thrombotic complications, Direct oral
anticoagulant (DOAC)s such as apixaban, dabigatran, rivaroxaban, or endoxaban
may be considered, given no drug-drug interactions. However, if there is
recurrence of VTE whilst on DOACs, it is suggested to change to therapeutic
dose of LMWH instead. While for those who are already on LMWH, they may have
an increased dosage by 25%-30%. For those who develop PE with hypotension,
systemic thrombolysis can be regarded as superior to without treatment in
patients deemed not to have high risk of bleeding.

Due to scarcity of resources, the International Union of Phlebology in
conjunction with the Australasian College of Phlebology initiated the Venous
and Lymphatic Triage and Acuity Scale (VELTAS) to triage patients with VTE
into different urgency levels to be treated.77 It serves as a general
guideline for patients diagnosed with VTE, not limited to those with COVID-19.
Patients with different clinical diagnosis are classified into "medical
emergency," "urgent," "semi-urgent," and "non-urgent."77 Those with massive
PE, acute iliofermoral DVT with phlegmasia, acute central vein thrombosis with
superior vena cava syndrome, or venous gangrene should be attended
"immediately." While others with chronic venous obstructive symptoms or those
who are stable and asymptomatic may be seen less urgently.

In 2021, the VAS-European Independent Foundation in Angiology/Vascular
Medicine has issued a position paper to guide the management of COVID-19
patients with vascular disease or cardiovascular risk factors.78 Similar to
other major guidelines, they suggest the use of LMWH as first line and reserve
UFH as second line for those with renal insufficieny. They suggest that
monitoring of effect should be by measuring anti-Xa levels rather than APTT.
DOAC including apixaban, betrixaban, endoxaban, and rivaroxaban are acceptable
as treatment and secondary prevention of VTE. They are contraindicated in
patients with creatinine clearance (Crcl) lower than 15 mL/min and dose
adjustment is needed in those with Crcl between 15 and 50 mL/min. Dalteparin
or tinzaparin is more suggested for this group of patients. Antiplatelet
treatment including aspirin, clopidogrel is suggested for secondary prevention
of arterial thrombosis. Aspirin is the option in those with cardiovascular
risk factors. As dyslipidemia is another risk factor associated with
cardiovascular disorders and cholesterol plays a part in regulating the immune
response, some postulate that statin treatment might improve endothelial and
vascular functions. However, inadequate results are available at present for a
sound conclusion.

## Discussion

COVID-19 associated VTE is a novel emerging disease entity with high morbidity
and mortality. The development of PE and DVT are common with frequent
complications and high associated mortality rates. Currently, due to the new
discoveries surrounding COVID-19 disease everyday, international guidelines
are being updated frequently. Therefore, there is no universally agreed
guidelines for diagnosis, outcome prediction, or management. Many national
studies have been published to suggest suitable and cost effective guidelines
to aid resource allocation and the management of COVID-19. The aim of this
paper is to review contemporary emerging literature on the incidence,
pathophysiology, predictive prognostic indicators, and management consensus
for Covid-19 related thrombotic complications, in particular DVT and PE.

SARS-CoV-2 leads to a high incidence of thrombosis, due to the following
reasons: First, the virus has a distinct high affinity to ACE2 inhibitors
which are abundant in the lung. This in turn leads to profound cytokine
reaction in the endothelium of the lung after viral invasion. Secondly, the
triggered overexpression of tissue factors including Factor VIII, VWF, IL-6,
and IL-17, together with decreased ADALTS-13 causes endothelial injury.
Thirdly, this dysregulation of coagulation cascade and intravascular
coagulopathy leads to acute thrombosis.

As the disease has only been around since the end of 2019, there are still
many unanswered questions regarding COVID-19 and its presentation,
complications, and treatment. The definite cause of pulmonary embolism is
still not well understood, whether it is from primary thrombosis in the lung
or as a result of a propagating embolism from elsewhere. The occurrence and
outcomes of VTE is further complicated by the following factors: first, it is
well known that ethnicity played an important role in affecting the occurrence
of VTE. African-Americans have a significantly higher rate of VTE, Europeans
have more genetic thrombotic disorders, and environmental factors should also
be taken into consideration.79,80 Whether these factors matter or can be
directly applied to COVID-19 patients need to be further elucidated. Secondly,
studies from different countries on incidence and outcomes of patients with
VTE may not be comparable as individual countries have different local
thrombo-prophylactic regimens and protocols. Thirdly, the incidence of VTE is
in fact determined by the availability of diagnostic tests and also the
threshold of ordering such tests. Some asymptomatic patients may have been
under-diagnosed. Difference in incidence amongst patients in different studies
may be affected by resource availability and whether screening tests are
enforced instead of triggered by presentation and clinical suspicion. DVT may
be difficult to be diagnosed via duplex ultrasound in patients who are sedated
or are obese. Performing Computer Tomography (CT) in patients on mechanical
ventilation may also be challenging and carries high risk of contamination.
Therefore, it is not practical to send every patient for investigation for
VTE. A French study found that in patients who were suspected to have PE, 75%
of CT scans were in fact negative.10

As this is a new disease entity, the development on prediction scores for
COVID-19 thrombosis detection is still underway. The high frequency of VTE in
critically ill patients and its association with high mortality suggests that
early diagnosis and treatment is definitely warranted. D-dimer has been proven
by multiple studies to be associated with higher morbidity and mortality in
COVID-19 patients. However, there are pitfalls when interpreting D-dimer.
First, raised D-dimer does not always indicate the presence of PE or DVT. It
is well known to be a marker of clot formation or an abnormally raised level
of fibrin degradation products.81 It can also be elevated after recent
surgery, trauma, sepsis, malignancy, pregnancy, or liver diseases. Therefore,
it is traditionally suggested not to be used as a screening tool for VTE, or
to be adopted as an adjunct to diagnosis due to its high sensitivity but low
specificity.82 Recently, there has been evolving studies on using simple
clotting profile and C-reactive protein (CRP) as markers for predicting VTE in
combination with D-dimer. However, the efficacy and usage of such a
combination require further investigation.

Despite worldwide efforts on studying COVID-19, there are many unanswered
questions regarding the management of COVID-19 associated complications. Our
study has several limitations. As a novel entity, existing studies all have
relatively small sample size, and the majority of these studies are single
center cohorts involving patients of one ethnicity. Individual institution may
have different guidelines and practice in terms of diagnosis, patient
stratification, and treatment. The predictive risk scores are not specific to
patients with COVID-19, and therefore direct comparison for outcome
measurement may be difficult. All of the studies so far are retrospective in
nature, further prospective trials may be conducted to delineate different
treatment outcomes and their required dosage and duration amongst patients of
all age groups and ethnicity.

Therefore, in conclusion, this paper showed that COVID-19 associated
thrombosis is an important clinical entity with high incidence and a
significant burden on medical services. Consensus for prophylaxis, diagnosis,
and treatment vary between localities due to individual experience, practice,
and availability of resources. Our knowledge on COVID-19 associated thrombosis
is rapidly expanding, and inevitably more prospective studies are warranted to
discover more evidence-based suggestions to formulate management regime for
the new clinical entity.